                           Tomahawk Installation
		         Version 1.1, April 28, 2006
		       Brian Smith, TippingPoint, Inc.

Before compiling Tomahawk, you need the following:
-- An appropriate machine. See System Requirements.
-- Libnet version 1.0.2a and libpcap 0.8.1.  Both are linked from
   tomahawk.sourceforge.net

System Requirements

   The system requirements for Tomahawk are the following:

      o 1.4+ GHz processor
      o At least 512 MB RAM
      o Two gigabit test NICs.  The Intel Pro1000 adapters are inexpensive
        and work well.  If you have only one PCI slot, the Intel dual port
        Pro1000 can be used.
      o One NIC for management

   Libnet and libpcap can be downloaded from the following:

	http://www.packetfactory.net/projects/libnet/
	http://sourceforge.net/projects/libpcap/

Directories

   Place these in a sibling directory to Tomahawk.  Your tree should
   be the following:

       SRC
 	  Libnet-1.0.2a
	  libpcap-0.8.1
	  tomahawk1.1

   If your OS includes Libnet and libpcap, then you can use the "independent"
   Makefile:

       cd tomahawk 1.1
       make -f Makefile.independent

   If this fails or you otherwise have trouble, try the following.

How to Compile Tomahawk

   Tomahawk compiles out of the box using the following commands:

   1) Compile Libnet and libpcap.
      - Follow the instructions in those directories.  The instructions 
        should follow the standard configure/make formula.

   2) Edit the Tomahawk Makefile.
      - You may want to change the value of the PREFIX variable.  This
        variable controls the tree in which Tomahawk is installed.  The
        default is /usr/local.
      - If you installed the Libnet source in another location, change
        LNETDIR.
      - If you installed the libpcap source in another location, change
        PCAPDIR.

   3) Compile the program.
      - Run 'make' in the tomahawk directory.

   4) Test the program.
      - Connect a crossover cable between two test NICS (eth0 and eth1).
      - Execute the following command:
           ./tomahawk -l 1 -f test.pcap
        You should see the following output:
           % ./tomahawk -l 1 -f test.pcap
           Beginning test

	     Completed 1 loop of trace test.pcap

	     Finished 1 loops of trace test.pcap Completed: 1, Timed out: 0
	     Retrans: 0
	     Sent: 9
	     Recv: 9

   5) Install the software.
      - Run 'make install' to copy Tomahawk and the man pages into their
        destination directories.

Spitefire Tutorial

   See the file TUTORIAL for getting started information.  Visit
   http://www.tippingpoint.com/tomahawk for information on testing NIPS
   using Tomahawk.
